---
layout: default
title: Ch 05.1 Reading Guide -- Biological Molecules
parent: Chapter content
nav_exclude: true
---

# Chapter 5 -- Biological molecules

## Proteins (5.1 & 5.4)

For this reading guide, please read 5.1 and 5.4 (proteins) *before* your lab date.

> OBJECTIVE: Describe the formation and breakdown of polymers by dehydration and hydrolysis reactions.

1. A \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is a long molecule made up of subunits called \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. They are assembled in a chemical reaction called \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and disassembled in a chemical reaction called \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
2. Look at Fig 5.2a.  Why do you think this is called a dehydration reaction?{{site.space3}}

    > OBJECTIVE: Describe the structure and function of amino acids and proteins.

3. Proteins are made from smaller molecules (building blocks) called ...{{site.space0}}
4. Study the diagram at the bottom of page 75. This is the general form for ALL amino acids. How many covalent bonds does the alpha carbon of an amino acid form? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_Why?{{site.space3}}
5. Look at the general structure/formula of an amino acid (pg. 75). Overall, are amino acids hydrophobic or hydrophilic? Explain why.{{site.space3}}
6. Draw the general structure of an amino acid in non-ionized (p 75) AND ionized forms (Fig 5.14) and label the alpha carbon. {{site.space4}}
7. In the structure above, circle and label the two functional groups present in every amino acid (which is why they are called amino acids!).
8. What would the carboxyl group look like if it came into contact with a base? Remember that a base absorbs H+ ions from the solution.{{site.space3}}
9. In Figure 5.14, the amino acids are shown in their ionic forms at pH ~7. Using glycine as an example, show how the general structure of an amino acid would be different at an extremely acidic pH? A very basic pH? Explain.

    | Glycine @ pH2 | Glycine @ pH7 | Glycine @ pH13 |
    |-|-|-|
    |<textarea cols="25%" rows="10" style="border-width: 0px;"></textarea>   | <textarea cols="25%" rows="10" style="border-width: 0px;"></textarea>   | <textarea cols="25%" rows="10" style="border-width: 0px;"></textarea>   |

    > OBJECTIVE: Be able to identify amino acids as hydrophilic or hydrophobic and whether they have polar, nonpolar, or electrically charged side chains. You do NOT need to memorize all amino acids, but you should be able to identify properties if given the structure of an amino acid.

9. How many different types of amino acids are present in the proteins of living organisms?\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ What is the word ending of most amino acids? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
10. Which part of the amino acids is used to sort them into their groups?{{site.space3}}
11. Observe the R-groups in the nonpolar side chains; hydrophobic category. Do you expect to find any amino acids in this category with polar covalent bonds in the R-group? Why or why not?{{site.space3}}
12. Which of the amino acids in this category contains a polar covalent bond in its R-group? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Draw the structure of this amino acid writing out all the C’s and H’s not shown in the structure in the text and label the polar bond. Why do you think this amino acid is considered non-polar even though it has one polar bond?{{site.space3}}
13. Draw the structure of an amino acid with a basic side chain. Show how this region could hydrogen bond with a water molecule.{{site.space3}}

    > OBJECTIVE: Be able to recognize and draw a peptide bond between 2 amino acids

1. What type of reaction occurs when a monomer is added to a polymer (look back at 5.1)? {{site.space0}}
2.  What type of bond forms? {{site.space0}}
3. What types of reactions occur when a polymer is disassembled/"broken" into monomers?{{site.space0}}
4. What types of bonds are broken? {{site.space0}}
5. Draw 2 glycine amino acids next to each other. Show with arrows how the peptide bond forms and what molecule comes out of this reaction.{{site.space7}}

    > OBJECTIVE: Understand the difference between a polypeptide and a protein
    >
    > OBJECTIVE: Understand how side chains affect the physical properties of polypeptides

1. What is a polypeptide chain?{{site.space3}}
2. How is a polypeptide different from a protein? {{site.space3}}

    >OBJECTIVE: Explain what proteins look like and understand how protein function depends on its structure.

1. Name the four levels of protein structure organization and list the types of bonds involved in each level.

    | Level of protein structure | Description                                                           | Type of bonds                                                         |
    |----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
    | Primary                    | <textarea cols="20%" rows="5" style="border-width: 0px;"></textarea>  | <textarea cols="25%" rows="5" style="border-width: 0px;"></textarea> |
    | Seconday                   | <textarea cols="20%" rows="5" style="border-width: 0px;"></textarea> | <textarea cols="25%" rows="5" style="border-width: 0px;"></textarea> |
    | Tertiary                   | <textarea cols="20%" rows="5" style="border-width: 0px;"></textarea> | <textarea cols="25%" rows="5" style="border-width: 0px;"></textarea> |
    | Quarternary                | <textarea cols="20%" rows="5" style="border-width: 0px;"></textarea> | <textarea cols="25%" rows="5" style="border-width: 0px;"></textarea> |

2. Which levels of protein structure are present in **all** proteins?{{site.space0}}
3. Refer to Figure 5.20. What happens when a protein is denatured?{{site.space3}}
4. Why does denaturation of a protein destroy its function?{{site.space3}}
5. Do you agree with the statement that secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structure all depend on the primary structure of a protein? Why or why not?{{site.space3}}
6. Name two diseases that are caused by mis-folded proteins.{{site.space1}}
