---
layout: default
title: Ch 05.2 Reading Guide -- Biological Molecules
parent: Chapter content
nav_exclude: true
---

# Chapter 5 -- Biological molecules

## Carbohydrates (5.2)

> OBJECTIVE: Describe the structure and function of carbohydrate monomers and polymers

1. \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ are the monomers of complex carbohydrates.
2. Look at Figure 5.3. What do all the molecules have in common so they are considered to be in the category of carbohydrates.{{site.space3}}
3. Most names for sugars end in \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
4. Complete this table:

    | Monosaccharide | # Carbon atoms | Molecular formaula |
    |----------------|----------------|--------------------|
    | Ribose         |                |                    |
    | Glucose        |                |                    |

5. What is the difference between ketoses and aldoses? How does this affect the molecular formula?{{site.space3}}
6. What happens to most 5 and 6 carbon sugars in aqueous solutions? Why is this reaction shown as an equilibrium reaction?{{site.space3}}
7. Draw 2 glucose monomers side by side. Connect them with a 1-4 glycosidic linkage.{{site.space5}}
8. What is the difference between &alpha; and &beta; glucose?{{site.space3}}
9. What is the shape of a long, unbranched, polymer made of &alpha;-glucose?{{site.space3}}
10. What is the shape of a long, unbranched, polymer made of &beta;-glucose?{{site.space3}}
11. Why does &beta;-glucose form structural polymers, whereas &alpha;-glucose would never be suitable for that?{{site.space3}}
12. Knowing that chitin is used in the exoskeleton of insects, what can you infer about the type of glucose and glycosidic bond used in building it?{{site.space3}}

## Lipids (5.3)

> OBJECTIVE: Describe the structure and function of different types of lipids (fats, phospholipids, & sterols).

1. Fats, also called  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ , are formed when three \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ are each joined to a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ via \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_reactions.
2. How many water molecules are “lost” during the formation of a fat?{{site.space0}}
3. Describe the difference in structure between saturated and unsaturated fats.{{site.space3}}
4. Draw a glycerol molecule. Attach 2 saturated and 1 unsaturated fatty acids to it using the appropriate linkage.{{site.space10}}

    > OBJECTIVE: Describe the structure and role of phospholipids in membranes.

1. Use a cartoon to show the difference between a triglyceride and the phospholipid you drew above.{{site.space6}}
2. Draw a diagram of a phospholipid bilayer.{{site.space6}}
3. Explain how the hydrophobic and hydrophilic structures in phospholipid molecules are important in the formation of phospholipid bilayer membranes.{{site.space3}}
4. How do you think a water molecule would interact with the inside of a phospholipid bilayer?{{site.space3}}
5. What is characteristic of all steroids?{{site.space3}}
6. What differs between steroids?{{site.space3}}

