---
layout: default
title: Ch 05.3 Reading Guide -- Biological Molecules
parent: Chapter content
nav_exclude: true
---

# Chapter 5 -- Biological molecules

## Nucleic acids (5.5 & 16.1)

Note that you'll need to read 16.1 for this.

    > OBJECTIVE: Describe how information is transmitted from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, where it is used to make proteins.

1. The nucleic acid that resides in the nucleus is...{{site.space0}}
2. The nucleic acid that can travel through the nuclear envelope is ... {{site.space0}}
3. Ribosomes are used for manufacturing proteins. In what part of the cell do they reside?{{site.space3}}  

    > OBJECTIVE: Describe the structure and function of nucleotides and nucleic acids (DNA & RNA).

1. Draw the sugars deoxyribose and ribose. Number the carbon atoms and indicate the difference between them.{{site.space8}}
2. What are the 3 components of a nucleotide? Draw them conceptually.{{site.space6}}
3. To which carbon atom is the phosphate group attached?  {{site.space0}}
4. To which carbon atom will the next nucleotide join? (This is very important){{site.space0}}
5. Why do you think DNA is described as having 3` and 5` ends?{{site.space3}}
6. Draw a simple diagram to show what is meant by the term 'antiparallel' when referring to DNA.{{site.space3}}
7. A pyrimidine is always complementary to a ... {{site.space0}}
8. Which bases pair with which?{{site.space2}}
9. How can you explain Chargaff's rules with what we now know about DNA structure (you'll need to read Chapter 16.1)?{{site.space4}}
10. How does the size of purines and pyrimidines indicate about the width of the DNA double helix?{{site.space4}}
