---
layout: default
title: Ch 05 -- Macromolecules
parent: Chapter content
is_parent: true
nav_order: 5
---

# Chapter 5 -- Biological macromolecules

This chapter introduces 4 important classes of macromolecules. We will revisit some of them later as we talk about biological systems or processes for which they are important.
* Proteins
* Carbohydrates
* Lipids
* Nucleic Acids

To complete the work for this chapter you should:
- [x] Download and print the [reading guide](ch05_rg.html) if you don't already have a hard copy.
- [x] Read chapter 5 in Campbell.
- [x] Watch video on Proteins (this should be the first you watch, despite the order in the textbook)
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/kHXFLAf0HLE" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- [x] Watch video on Carbohydrates
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/-M6S4QoLV3c" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- [x] Watch video on Lipids
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/CnjnYah7Uyw" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- [x] Watch video on Nucleic acids
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/XcgrK-AvUYQ" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Some of the information in the videos exceeds that presented in Campbell, and there is some content that you do not need for exams. In particular:
* You do not need to know the structures of all amino acids. Be able to recognize whether an amino acid is likely to be hydrophobic or hydrophilic and acid, neutral, or basic based on its structure. You will be presented with the structure for any you need to evaluate.
* You do not need to know details about naming carbohydrates. You should recognize the ways in which they differ.

- In preparation for our lab on proteins, you should read the introduction of [this paper by Ye et al. (2017)]({{site.url}}/b40/assets/labs/Ye_etal_Heating_Proteins.pdf). As you read it, don't worry about any of the details, but try to make note of **HOW** it's written. Note the tone the authors use, as well as the way they cite other literature.
  - Note the formal tone they use in their writing. While scientists often have a good sense of humor, it doesn't usually come out in their written papers. Yours should emulate this -- it isn't a creative writing exercise.
  - They use the present tense in the introduction.
      - **Present tense** for things that are known (or thought) to be true (eg. "Milk powder *has* high nutritional value...")
      - It would also be acceptable to use the **Past tense** for discoveries made previously by other researchers (eg. Smith and Jones (1999) *showed* that milk proteins are sensitive to high heat.")
  - They use the past tense in the methods (eg. "The measurements *were* carried out...").
