---
layout: default
title: Ch 14.3 Reading Guide -- Extensions to Mendelian Genetics
parent: Chapter content
nav_exclude: true
---

# Extensions to Mendelian genetics (14.3)

> OBJECTIVE: Understand and Describe Extensions of Mendel’s Rules
> Study the vocabulary: incomplete dominance, codominance, multiple allelism, pleiotropy, epistasis, environmental effects, polygenic inheritance. Make sure you add them to the appropriate explanations above.


1. What are “dominant” and “recessive” alleles? Note that to answer this question you must think about the phenotype of heterozygotes, not homozygotes.{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans"> A dominant allele 'hides' a recessive allele so the heterozygote looks like one or the other homozygote. The homozygote that looks like the heterozygote has the dominant alleles. </span>{% else %}{{site.space3}}{% endif %}
2. What are codominant alleles? Again, think about the phenotype of the heterozygote. Give an example.{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans"> Think of the MN blood types. Both alleles are expressed in the heterozygote.</span>{% else %}{{site.space3}}{% endif %}
3. What is incomplete dominance? Again, look at the phenotype of the heterozygote. Give an example.{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans"> Think of the snapdragons. The heterozygote has a phenotype that is intermediate between the two homozygotes.      </span>{% else %}{{site.space3}}{% endif %}
4. Does each gene affect Just one trait? Explain. Example?{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans">No, think of pleiotropy and Marfan syndrome </span>{% else %}{{site.space3}}{% endif %}
5. Are all traits determined by a gene? Explain. Example?{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans">No, many traits have strong (or even exclusive) environmental influence. Also, many traits are determined by more than one gene.</span>{% else %}{{site.space3}}{% endif %}
6. How does the environment affect phenotypes? Explain. Example?{{site.space3}}
7. Can different genes work together to affect one phenotype? Explain. Example?{{site.space3}}
8. How are the labs in fig 14.12 a modification of the 9:3:3:1 ratio? Which groups are combined?{{site.space3}}
7. What does the E locus do and why are all recessive homozygotes yellow, regardless of the other (B) locus?{{site.space3}}
8. What do you think would happen to the distribution shown on the left of Fig 14.13 if there were more genes (4, 5, 6) that affected skin color in the same way?{{site.space3}}
2. In sheep, white is due to a dominant gene (W), black to its recessive allele (w).   A white ewe mated to a white ram produces a black lamb.   List the genotypes of all the animals in this problem.  If they produce another offspring could it be white?  If so what are the chances?{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans"> Both parents are Ww. Black lamb is ww. Other offspring could be white (p(white offspring) = 3/4) </span>{% else %}{{site.space3}}{% endif %}
3. In humans, normal pigmentation is due to a dominant gene (C), albinism is due to its recessive allele (c).   A normal man marries an albino woman.  Their first child is an albino.  What are the genotypes of these three people?
    * Normal  man{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans"> Cc </span>{% else %}{{site.space0}}{% endif %}
    * Albino woman{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans"> cc  </span>{% else %}{{site.space0}}{% endif %}
    * First child {% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans"> cc </span>{% else %}{{site.space0}}{% endif %}
4. An albino man marries a normally pigmented woman.  They have nine children all normally pigmented.  What are the most probable genotypes of the parents and the children?{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans"> This is like a testcross with the albino man being the tester. If the woman is a heterozygote, the probability of each child being albino is 1/2. So the probability of having 9 normal children is 1/2<sup>9</sup> (about 0.2%). If she is AA homozygote, then all children will be normally pigmented heterozygotes. This is therefore the (much) more likely genotype of the woman.</span>{% else %}{{site.space3}}{% endif %}
5. In guinea pigs Black coat "B" is dominant over white coat "b".  Can two black coat parents produce white coat offspring? Can two white coat parents produce black coat offspring? Explain.{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans"> White offspring are possible if both parents are heterozygotes. Two white parents cannot produce black offspring because neither of them has a 'B' allele.     </span>{% else %}{{site.space5}}{% endif %}
6. In fruit flies, straight wings is dominant over curly. Show how you would determine if a straight winged fly was heterozygous or homozygous? How would the possible outcomes inform your decision?{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans">   Show the outcomes for a test cross   </span>{% else %}{{site.space3}}{% endif %}
7. In humans, the ability to taste phenylthiourea (PTU) is dominant. "Tasters" (TT) or (Tt) perceive an extremely bitter taste of PTU, while "non tasters" (tt) experience no sensation, or taste. What are the genotypes of Mr. and Mrs. Meadowmuffin, who can taste PTU, and who have 3 children, one of whom is a non-taster? Draw a pedigree of the Meadowmuffin family and label each person with their genotype. {% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans">  The fact that one child is a non-taster (tt) means that both parents must have a 't' allele, but since they are both tasters, they must be heterozygotes. </span>{% else %}{{site.space6}}{% endif %}
8. Yellow guinea pigs crossed with white ones always produce cream-colored offspring.  Two cream guinea pigs when crossed produce offspring in a ratio of 1 yellow:2 cream:1 white.  List the genotypes and phenotypic ratios produced by the following crosses:
    * yellow x cream {{site.space0}}
    * white x cream{{site.space0}}
    * What “extension” of Mendel’s hypothesis is this an example of?{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans">  Incomplete dominance (like the pink snapdragons)    </span>{% else %}{{site.space0}}{% endif %}
9. Camellia flowers can be red or white or white and red. Draw and fill in the Punnett square and determine the expected genotypes and phenotypes from crossing homozygous red and heterozygous red and white parents.{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans"> This is co-dominance. 1/2 offspring will be red (RR) and half will be red and white (RW)     </span>{% else %}{{site.space3}}{% endif %}
10. Can two people with type B blood have a child with type O blood?  Explain.  What is the probability of this happening? {% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans">  Yes, it's possible. Assuming parents are both 'Bi', the probability of a child with type O blood is 1/4 (genotype ii)    </span>{% else %}{{site.space3}}{% endif %}
    * What kind of child could a parent with type AB blood **not** have?{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans">  Type O is not possible.    </span>{% else %}{{site.space0}}{% endif %}
    * What “extension/exception(s)" of Mendel’s hypothesis is Blood Type an example of?{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans"> Codominance between A and B alleles, but dominance between A and i (and also between B and i) </span>{% else %}{{site.space0}}{% endif %}

    > OBJECTIVE: Understand the role of the environment and polygenic inheritance in the expression of quantitative traits

11. What is meant by a 'quantitative trait'?{{site.space3}}
12. Draw a histogram showing the number of offspring with different colored skin shown in Fig 14.13. This exercise is described at the top of page 263.{{site.space3}}
13. How would this histogram change if skin color was influenced by more genes?{{site.space3}}

# Human pedigree analysis (14.4)

Note that there will be an online assignment to go along with this (Bio 40 only).

> OBJECTIVE: Understand how to draw a pedigree and how pedigrees can inform us about  inheritance patterns

1. Draw a pedigree of your family using the symbols in Fig 14.15. Make sure you label yourself!{{site.space6}}
2. Draw a pedigree of 2 normal parents with one normal and one affected son. Explain why this trait cannot be dominant. {{site.space3}}
3. Draw a pedigree of an affected father and an unaffected mother, and their 2 affected and 2 unaffected children. {{site.space3}}
4. Why may this pedigree be of a dominant condition?{{site.space3}}
5. How may this pedigree be of a recessive condition?{{site.space3}}
6. Draw the pedigree of John and Carol described in the counseling section on page 288. {{site.space3}}
7. Why do both John and Carol have a 2/3 chance of being a carrier of this recessive disorder?{% if site.data.answers.rg14 %}<span class="ans"> This is because each have a parent that is a homozygote, so there is some possibility that they are carriers. Without any information about their phenotype, we'd say that their chance of being heterozygous is 1/2 (for each of them). However, we know that their phenotype is normal, so they cannot be a recessive homozygote. This leaves 3 squares from the Punnett square as possibilities, 2 of which put them as carriers.  </span>{% else %}{{site.space3}}{% endif %}
