---
layout: default
title: Ch 09 Reading Guide -- Respiration and Fermentation (9.4)
parent: Chapter content
nav_exclude: true
---

# Chapter 9.5 -- Chemiosmosis and the Electron Transport Chain

> OBJECTIVE: Summarize the net ATP yield from the oxidation of a glucose molecule by constructing an ATP ledger.

3. Fill out the following table

    | STAGE OF CELLULAR <br>RESPIRATION | LOCATION <br>IN CELL | STARTING <br>MOLECULES | MOLECULES <br>PRODUCED | SUMMARY OF STAGE |
    |-|-|-|-|-|
    | Glycolysis | {{site.space5t4}} | {{site.space5t4}} | {{site.space5t4}} | Splits glucose molecule <br>in two and harvests a little <br>energy from glucose <br> |
    | Pyruvate Oxidation | {{site.space5t4}} | Pyruvate | {{site.space5t4}} | {{site.space5t4}} |
    | Citric Acid Cycle | {{site.space5t4}} | {{site.space5t4}} | NADH <br> FADH2<br> CO2<br> ATP | {{site.space5t4}} |
    | Oxidative <br>Phosphorylation | Mitochondria <br>Inner Membrane | {{site.space5t4}} | {{site.space5t4}} | {{site.space5t4}} |

    > OBJECTIVE: Explain where and how the respiratory electron transport chain creates a proton gradient.

1. Look back at Figure 8.7.
    * Write the reversible reaction between NAD+ and NADH.  Label which is the reduced form and which is the oxidized form. Label the arrows with exergonic and endergonic.{{site.space3}}
    * Which form (NAD+ or NADH) is the high-energy form (ie which has more potential energy)?
3. How do electrons enter the electron transport chain (ETC)?{{site.space3}}

    > OBJECTIVE: Explain how the exergonic “slide” of electrons down the electron transport chain is coupled to the endergonic production of ATP by chemiosmosis.
    > OBJECTIVE: Explain why this gradient is described as a proton motive force.

1. What is the basic 'job' of the ETC? (What do protein complexes I, III, and IV do?){{site.space3}}
2. As electrons move through the electron transport chain, they move from molecules with \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (lower or higher) electronegativity to molecules with \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(lower or higher) electronegativity. Finally, they are combined with Oxygen, which has the \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(highest or lowest) electronegativity.
3. The proton pumps of the ETC pump protons into what part of the mitochondria?{{site.space0}}
4. What is meant by a 'proton gradient'?{{site.space3}}
5. Why do protons 'want' to get back into the inner region (matrix) of the mitochondria?{{site.space3}}
6. What path do protons find to get back into the mitochondrial matrix? What happens as they take this route back to the matrix?{{site.space3}}
7. Why is oxygen so important for the ETC? What do you think would happen without it (also, try holding your breath forever!){{site.space3}}
8. Look at figures 9.14. Which electron carrier do you think causes more protons to be pumped into the intermembrane space. How do you know?{{site.space3}}
9. Look at the pictures of mitochondria in Figure 7.13. What advantage does having the inner membrane of the mitochondria “highly folded and wrinkled”? (Hint: what does wrinkling do to the surface area and why would this be beneficial?)
10. What category of molecule is ATP synthase?{{site.space0}}
11. What is the function of ATP synthase?{{site.space3}}
12. Describe the similarity between ATP synthase shown in Fig 9.18 and a hydroelectric turbine.{{site.space3}}
13. Is the generation of ATP by ATP synthase endergonic or exergonic? What powers ATP synthase?{{site.space3}}
14. What is chemiosmosis? What is the Proton-motive force? Compare this to a dam on a river.{{site.space3}}
15. The generation of ATP by ATP Synthase is known as oxidative phosphorylation. What term is used to describe the direct production of ATP such as during glycolysis?{{site.space0}}
16. If you were to radioactively label the oxygen you were breathing in, what molecule would become radiolabeled as a result of cellular respiration? (hint, it's not CO<sub>2</sub>){{site.space0}}
17. If ALL of the proton-motive force generated by the electron transport chain was used to drive ATP production, how many ADP molecules could be photosphorylated to ATP?
