---
layout: default
title: Chapter 01 -- Themes of biology and science
parent: Chapter content
---

# CH 1 Reading Guide: Biological themes and scientific inquiry
Reading guides in this course are designed to encourage (OK, 'force') you to read actively, so that you fully understand the material. The **best** way to do this, will be to print out a copy and fill it in with a pen or pencil. The second best way to do this would be to type answers in the boxes, however, note that although you can print your work, you won't be able to save it. *This is intentional*. In the past, I have found that students simply copy and paste answers from textbooks or the web, rather than trying to do the assignments thoughtfully and completely. As a result, they give up on the active learning component. Therefore, I will not provide a save-able pdf or anything like that. If you want to spend the time to make one and fill it out, that is your choice (you won't lose points for doing so but you'd probably be better off spending that time learning and understanding the material).

## Additional Reading:
1. Chapter 9 of [Zen and The Art of Motorcycle Maintenance](ZenAndTheArt_embedded.pdf).
2. Watch the 10 minute video at about [natural selection](https://www.biointeractive.org/classroom-resources/making-fittest-natural-selection-and-adaptation)

> Objective: Utilize The Properties of Life to distinguish between
      living organisms and non-living things.

1. Give a brief explanation of each property of life listed below. Use your own words – don't copy from the textbook.
    * Order {{site.space3}}
    * Reproduction {{site.space3}}
    * Growth and development {{site.space3}}
    * Evolution {{site.space3}}
    * Processing energy {{site.space3}}
    * Regulation {{site.space3}}
    * Response to environment {{site.space3}}

    > Objective: List and understand 5 unifying themes in biology:
    > Emergent Properties, Information processing, transfer of energy and matter, interactions, and Evolution.

1. Give 2 examples (not from your book) where new properties emerge at a higher level of organization.

 * Example 1: {{site.space1}}

 * Example 2: {{site.space1}}

1. Explain how the structure of a leaf gives clues to what the leaf does. {{site.space3}}

2. Information in cells is contained in a molecule called \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3. By themselves, genes aren't useful. Use Fig 1.8 to describe how the information in genes gets used to create something useful for the cell.  {{site.space3}}

4. What do you think would happen if an organism stopped processing energy? {{site.space3}}

5. Give an example of interactions between organisms in a garden.  {{site.space3}}

6. Which theme(s) is(are) exemplified by your growth from a single, fertilized egg? {{site.space3}}

    > Objective: Understand that evolution accounts for both the unity and diversity of life and the ideas can be helpful in understanding much of biology.

1. Give a definition of Evolution (see page 11). {{site.space3}}

2. Why do you think people say that evolution explains the 'unity' (similarity) of life?  {{site.space3}}

3. What evidence do you think a biologist might use to claim that humans and mice are related? Explain. {{site.space3}}
4. Explain what is shown in Fig 1.20? {{site.space4}}
5. Use Fig 1.20 to explain why biologists say that evolution accounts for the diversity of life. {{site.space4}}

3. List the 3 domains of life. Which are prokaryotic (don't have a nucleus) and which are eukaryotic (have a nucleus)?  {{site.space3}}

4. Watch the 10 minute video at about [natural selection](https://www.biointeractive.org/classroom-resources/making-fittest-natural-selection-and-adaptation).  What is the adaptation being disucssed? Why do the animals vary between the 2 habitats?  {{site.space5}}
5. What is an 'adaptation?' {{site.space3}}

    > Objective: Understand the scientific method

1. In your own words, what is the difference between inductive and deductive reasoning? (Make sure to read Chap 9 of Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance for this) {{site.space4}}

2. Look at Fig 1.22. What do you think a scientist would do if she tested hypothesis 1 and found that it was unsupported? {{site.space3}}

3. Think of 2 additional hypotheses that might explain why the desk lamp doesn't work (Fig 1.22) {{site.space3}}

4. List 3 differences between a theory and a hypothesis. {{site.space3}}

5. What do you think of the idea that "Evolutionary theory can't be trusted because it's _just_ a theory"? {{site.space3}}

    > Objective: Be able to form a testable hypothesis in the form of a Research hypothesis

    A research hypothesis takes the form of **"If (hypothesis) ... and (test) ... then (prediction)"**. Although it forms a cumbersome sentence, it is useful for organizing your thoughts and making sure that an experiment you design will actually test what you want to test.

1. Use a properly formed **research hypothesis** to try to understand why your flashlight doesn't work. {{site.space5}}
2. Use a **research hypothesis** to understand why people sweat when the weather is hot. Remember that the hypothesis part is an **explanation**. {{site.space5}}
3. What kinds of hypotheses are not testable? {{site.space2}}

    > Objective: Understand the difference between dependent and independent variables

1. Sketch out a graph (include axes and labels) that shows the relationship between air temparature and time of day at your house. {{site.space10}}
1. Mark on your graph which axis is the dependent variable? Which is independent?
1. Explain your reasoning in how you knew the graph should be shaped this way. {{site.space3}}
1. Does your answer to the question above show deductive or inductive reasoning? {{site.space0}}
1. Use the other kind of reasoning to give an explanation of how you knew the graph would look like that. {{site.space3}}
