---
layout: default
title: Ch 17 Reading Guide -- Gene Expression - Transcription
parent: Chapter content
nav_exclude: true
---


# Chapter 17 -- Gene Expression - Transcription

> OBJECTIVE: Be able to describe and apply the process of transcription and connect transcription to metabolism and energy use.

1. Where in the cell does transcription occur?{{site.space0}}
2. What is the end product of transcription?{{site.space0}}
3. What is the end product of translation?{{site.space0}}
4. What is the name of the DNA region to which the RNA polymerase binds in order to initiate transcription?{{site.space0}}
5. Look at Figure 16.14. Free incoming NTPs have \_\_\_\_ phosphate groups. After being joined in the phosphodiester linkage, they only have \_\_\_\_\_. Is this reaction spontaneous? (This process is the same for the polymerasation of DNA and RNA){{site.space0}}
6. What enzyme constructs the mRNA molecule?{{site.space0}}
7. What are the 3 phases of transcription?{{site.space3}}
8. In prokaryotes, how does the RNA polymerase know where to begin transcribing? Draw this in a diagram.{{site.space6}}
9. In bacteria, what signals the RNA polymerase to stop transcribing?{{site.space3}}
10. What do you think would happen if you deleted 3 base pairs in the TATA box of a bacterial gene? How might that affect the bacterial phenotype?{{site.space3}}
11. To which end of the mRNA molecule are nucleotides added?{{site.space0}}
12. How do the four bases of RNA pair up with four bases of DNA (A, T, C, G) when the mRNA is constructed?{{site.space3}}
13. To which end are dNTPs added to DNA?{{site.space0}}
14. To which end are NTPs added to RNA?{{site.space0}}
15. Which strand of DNA gets transcribed? The coding or template strand?{{site.space3}}
16. Why do you think the non-template strand also called the ‘coding’ strand?{{site.space3}}
17. Why do you think transcription factors are an important part of the transcription 'machinery'?{{site.space3}}

    > OBJECTIVE: Understand RNA processing in eukaryotes

1. What is added to the 5’ end of mRNA? Why?{{site.space3}}
2. What is added to the 3’ end of mRNA? Why?{{site.space3}}
3. What is an intron? An Exon?{{site.space6}}
4. Where does the mRNA go to after processing?{{site.space0}}
5. Compare the length of DNA to the length of processed (mature) mRNA in eukaryotes? What makes the DNA longer than mRNA? What increases the length of mRNA relative to DNA?{{site.space3}}
6. Go to the website [https://www.ensembl.org/index.html](https://www.ensembl.org/index.html)
In the search box at the top right, search for “SHANK3”. Click on the first result “SHANK3 (Human gene)” and look at the diagram of the gene. The boxes represent exons and the bent lines represent introns. Click on the red gene that is labeled “SHANK3-201 > Protein coding”. How many exons are there?{{site.space0}}
7. This map is to scale and is typical of eukaryotic genes. What does this tell you about the relative size of introns vs exons?{{site.space3}}
8. What is the main function of a spliceosome?{{site.space3}}
9. List one reason why alternative RNA splicing may lead to new proteins over evolutionary time.{{site.space3}}
